# Accessing the RPi using Secure Shell(SSH)

In order to access the RPi using SSH you should have the previous steps completed:

- Enabled SSH in the initial configuration of the SD card
- You know the IP address of your Raspberry Pi.  

## SSH Client
SSH is built into Linux, Mac OSX and Windows. 
The examples that follow are using a Windows machine. However, the process is the same for Linux, Mac OSX. If you wish to SSH in from older Windows version, see the final section in this step: 

### SSH Connection - Command Line

To connect to your Pi, enter the following command into a terminal and replace \<HOST> with the host name (hdipRpi.local) or IP address of the RPi and \<username> with the user name you configured the OS with in a previous step.

~~~bash
ssh <username>@<HOST>
~~~

If you receive a connection timed out error it is likely that you have entered the wrong IP address/hostname for the Raspberry Pi.

When the connection works you will see a security/authenticity warning. Type  ***yes*** to continue. You will only see this warning the first time you connect.

>  **Note:** You may be given a warning and asked to clear the record from your list of known devices. Accept this instruction and trying the ssh command again should be successful.

Next you will be prompted for the password you entered in the previous step (I told you to remember it!) The following image shows what a successful connection looks like(the ip address you use will be different):

~~~
> ssh frank@hdipRpi.local
The authenticity of host 'hdiprpi.local (fe80::48da:3c24:1219:16d5%11)' can't be established.
ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:+Ox2z/MNg0Gfw9X5F4A0riijkZOdcmvPZPiyBeRDZA8.
This host key is known by the following other names/addresses:
    C:\Users\fxwal/.ssh/known_hosts:24: 172.24.10.127
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no/[fingerprint])? yes
Warning: Permanently added 'hdiprpi.local' (ED25519) to the list of known hosts.
frank@hdiprpi.local's password:
Linux hdipRpi 6.12.47+rpt-rpi-v8 #1 SMP PREEMPT Debian 1:6.12.47-1+rpt1 (2025-09-16) aarch64

The programs included with the Debian GNU/Linux system are free software;
the exact distribution terms for each program are described in the
individual files in /usr/share/doc/*/copyright.

Debian GNU/Linux comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY, to the extent
permitted by applicable law.
Last login: Wed Oct 22 12:25:12 2025 from 172.24.10.123
frank@hdipRpi:~ $
~~~

In your command line window, you should now have the Raspberry Pi prompt:

~~~bash
username@hdipRpi:~ $
~~~

You have now started a Secure Shell session on the Rpi, and can remotely execute commands on the RPi.

## Connection Problems

A connection might be unsuccessful for various reasons. If you get a network connection error or connection time out, **always check the *physical* first** - is the RPi turned on and is the red led on!? Check that you have the correct IP address for the RPi by pinging it. If the ping replies successfully then it may be the case that you have not enabled/disabled SSH on the RPi. Power down the RPi and repeat the **Enable SSH section** in the Raspberry Pi OS Configuration page of this lab. 

Also, remember that **the the IP address of the RPi can change as it uses Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol(DHCP)**. It'll usually keep the same IP for some time however you may need to find and update the IP address if this happens.
