# Programming the Arduino

an Arduino program is called a `Sketch`, and uses uses a simplified version of the C++ programming language. The Arduino IDE provides a set of core libraries and a framework that make it easier  to write code for microcontroller-based projects without needing a deep knowledge of C++ or microcontroller-specific programming.

An Arduino sketch contains two main functions:

1. `setup()`: This function is run once when the board starts up. It's used for initialization tasks.
2. `loop()`: This function runs continuously after the `setup()` function completes. It's the main part of your program where you'll check sensors, control outputs, and handle most of the logic.

The Arduino IDE takes care of certain background tasks, so you only need to worry about `setup()` and `loop()`.

### "Hello World"

+ In the Arduino IDE, create a new sketch by selecting `File` > `New`.

+ Replace the existing sketch by copying the following code into the sketch window:

```cpp
//run once when the board starts up
void setup() {
  // Initialize serial communication at 9600 bits per second:
  Serial.begin(9600);
}

//runs continuously
void loop() {
  // Print "Hello, World!" to the Serial Monitor:
  Serial.println("Hello, World!");

  // Wait for 1 second before printing again:
  delay(1000);
}
```

+ Click on the `Upload` button (represented by the right arrow icon) in the Arduino IDE.

+ Wait for the message "Done uploading" to appear at the bottom of the IDE.
+ Open the Serial Monitor by clicking on `Tools` > `Serial Monitor` or by pressing `CTRL + SHIFT + M`.
+ You should see the message "Hello, World!" being displayed every second.

Have a look at the code. Make sure you understand the logic here. Check the comments in the code (preceeded by //)  to help you. 
